# Design Patterns for Key-Value Datastores 

## An overview of design patterns
Various design patterns are useful when working with key-value databases. Examples include Time To Live (TTL), Emulating 
Tables, Aggregates, Atomic Aggregates, Enumerable Keys, and Indexes.

These patterns can be applied directly or may require modifications based on specific use cases. They serve as guides 
for solving common problems and are not rigid solutions mandated by a strict sset of design rules.

## Time To Live (TTL) Keys 
TTL keys describe transient objects that are automatically removed when a certain condition is met. They are ideal for caching data in memory-limited servers or when keys need to hold a resource for a specific period. TTL keys allow users 
to reserve a resource temporarily while other operations are executed.

Consider an application selling tickets for music events with a large number of active users. Customers add key-value 
pairs to the database to reserve seats while their payment is processes. Seats shouldn't be held for an extended period, 
especially if customers abandon their carts.

A possible implementation could be done as each key-value pair consisting of:
- **Key:** the seat being saved.
- **Value:** the customer purchasing the seat.
Setting a 5-minute TTL allows flexibility in handling scenarios like payment authorization failures or abandoned carts.

With datastore support for TTL keys (e.g., Redis), there’s no need for ad-hoc methods to check key expiration.	

## Emulating tables
Emulating tables involves using a key-naming convention and basic 
get/set operations. For example, we can utilize get_cust_attribute and 
set_curst_attribute functions as building blocks for getting and setting 
customer records:
```python
def add_cust_record(cus_id, fname, lname, address, city, state, zip):
	set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘fname’, fname)
set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘lname’, lname)
	set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘addr’, address)
set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘city’, city)
	set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘state’, state)
set_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘zip’, zip)

def get_cust_record(cust_id):
	fname = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘fname’)
	lname = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘lname’)
address = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘addr’)
	city = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘city’)
state = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘state’)
	zip = get_customer_attribute(cust_id, ‘zip’)

	cust_record = [fname, name, address, state, zip]
	return cust_record
```
The functions add_cust_record and `get_cust_record` emulate table-like behavior in key-value store, while 
`add_cust_attribute` sets attributes for a given customer ID and `get_cust_attribute` retrieves a customer record based 
on the provided customer ID.

This technique is useful for managing a small number of emulated tables where routine get/set operations are required. 
Emulated tables are not suitable for complex filtering conditions and range searches. As an alternative solution, the 
use of key-value databases supporting tables (e.g., Oracle’s NoSQL database), advanced search features 
(e.g., Riak) or relational databases (e.g., MySQL) is preferable for addressing complex filtering and search 
requirements.

## Aggregates
Aggregation is a pattern used to handle attributes of different subtypes of an entity. For example, consider a concert 
ticket sales system with various types of concerts, such as those held in large stadiums, smaller venues with no 
assigned seating, and multi-day festivals with open seating. A list of attributes needs to be tracked for each type of 
concert.

|       **Attribute**     |   **Concert subtype**   |
|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Concert date            | Stadium and small venue |
| Festival start date     | Festival                |
| Festival end date       | Festival                |
| Location description    | All                     |
| Assigned seat           | Stadium                 |
| Start time              | Stadium and small venue |
| Price                   | All                     |
| Performer name          | Stadium and small venue |
| Festival name           | Festival                |

Consider these two approaches:
- **RDBMS Approach:** in a relational database management system, two common approaches for aggregation are creating 
either a single table with all attributes or a table with common attributes and subtype tables.
The first option may lead to unused columns and may become unwieldy with the growth of subtypes and attributes. The 
second option requires join operations to retrieve all data about a concert ticket.
- **KV Approach:** KV databases utilize a different approach for aggregation. A single entity type (e.g., concert) is 
used for all types of concerts, with values represented as lists of attribute-value pairs specific to each type. A type 
indicator in the list specifies the concert type.

```python
# Stadium ticket
{
 'type': 'stadium',
 'conDate': '15-Mar-2015',
 'locDescr': 'Springfield Civic Center',
 'assgnSeat': 'J38',
 'startTime': '17:30',
 'price': '$50.00',
 'perfName': 'The National'
}

# Festival ticket
{
 'type': 'festival',
 'festStartDate': '01-Feb-2015',
 'festEndDate': '01-Feb-2015',
 'locDescr': 'Portland, OR',
 'price': '$100.00',
 'festName': 'PDX Jazz Festival'
}

# Small venue ticket
{
 'type': 'small venue',
 'conDate': '12-Jun-2015',
 'locDescr': 'Plymoth Concert Hall',
 'startTime': '17:30',
 'price': '$75.00',
 'perfName': 'Joshua Redman'
}

```
Tickets are stored within the namespace ConcertApp. Example entries 
for different types of tickets are demonstrated.
```python
# Storage in KV Databases
ConcertApp = {
 'ticket:18380': {
  'type': 'stadium',
  'conDate': '15-Mar-2015',
  'locDescr': 'Springfield Civic Center',
  'assgnSeat': 'J38',
  'startTime': '17:30',
  'price': '$50.00',
  'perfName': 'The National'
 },
 'ticket:18381': {
  'type': 'small venue',
  'conDate': '12-Jun-2015',
  'locDescr': 'Plymoth Concert Hall',
  'startTime': '17:30',
  'price': '$75.00',
  'perfName': 'Joshua Redman'
 },
 'ticket:18382': {
  'type': 'festival',
  'festStartDate': '01-Feb-2015',
  'festEndDate': '01-Feb-2015',
  'locDescr': 'Portland, OR',
  'price': '$100.00',
  'festName': 'PDX Jazz Festival'
 }
}

```
Set and get functions are used to assign or retrieve attribute values based on the type of ticket.

## Atomic aggregates
Atomic aggregates contain all values that must be updated together or not at all. This is achieved with a single assignment statement to save multiple values. 
As an example, consider a saving ticket log information:
Using a single assignment statement:
```python
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888'] = {'conDate': '15-Mar-2015', 'locDescr': 'Springfield Civic Center', 'assgnSeat': 'J38'}
```
Using multiple assignment statements:
```python
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888:conDate'] = '15-Mar-2015'
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888:locDescr'] = 'Springfield Civic Center'
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888:assgnSeat'] = 'J38'
```

## Enumerable keys
Enumerable keys are keys that use counters or sequences. They are typically a combination of the entity name and counter, increasing with each new entry. Take as an example, a recording ticket log information:
```python
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888'] = {'conDate': '15-Mar-2015', 'locDescr': 'Springfield Civic Center', 'assgnSeat': 'J38'}
```
This is not suitable for retrieving log entries for all tickets sold on a particular day. To facilitate retrieval of log entries for all tickets on a specific day, we can format the key as ‘ticketLog’ concatenated with a date and a per-date counter. For example:
```python
ConcertApp['ticketLog:20140617:10']
```
This allows deriving the first k tickets sold on a given date.

## Inverted indexes
Inverted indexes are sets of key-value pairs that allow for looking up keys or values by other attribute values of the same entity. 
Consider the following pair:
```python
ConcertApp['ticketLog:9888'] = {'conDate': '15-Mar-2015', 'locDescr': 'Springfield Civic Center', 'assgnSeat': 'J38'}
```
This format does not allow listing seats assigned to a particular location, unless the KV database provides search capabilities.
To address the issue, we can utilize a pair `<location, seats>` to track the tickets sold at a location. An implementation example would be:
```python
def add_location_assignment_seat(location_desc, seat):
	seat_list = ConcertApp[location_desc]
	seat_list.append(seat)
	ConcertApp[location_description] = seat_list
```
In summary, inverted indexes offer a powerful means of retrieving key-value pairs by attribute values, enhancing the 
flexibility and efficiency of data retrieval.