# Introducing Key-Value Data Stores Features

## Key Design and Partitioning
Key design plays a **crucial role** in the **usability** of a key-value database:
- **Random keys** for each value can pose challenges, unless a mapping exists within a data structure to translate these seemingly nonsensical keys into meaningful entities.
- Keys must possess a **logical structure** to enhance the **readability** and **extensibility** of the codebase.

It’s also essential to prioritize **storage efficiency** in the design process: adherence to **well-defined naming convention** for keys is imperative. This facilitates the **straightforward creation of keys** for new data, 
streamlining database management and enhancing scalability.

## Naming Conventions
It’s mandatory to choose naming components that are **meaningful and clear** to anyone working with the database. A 
revalent strategy is using abbreviations consisting of 3-4 letters to represent commonly referred components. For instance, ‘cust’ for customer, or ‘inv’ for inventory.

It’s also helpful to incorporate **range-based components**, such as counters or dates, especially when there’s a need 
to retrieve ranges of values efficiently. By convention, **delimiters** such as colons are used to separate components 
in a key. It’s important to keep keys **as short as possible**, while ensuring **clarity and usability** for developers 
and database users alike.

## Efficient Key Design
A well-designed key pattern significantly reduces the amount of code required for accessing and setting values within a database. Here’s an example of a key pattern:
- **Entity:** `Customer`
- **Unique Identifier:** `‘198277’`
- **Attribute Name:** `‘lname’`
- **Delimiter:** `‘:’`

The goal is to **facilitate access to every attribute** of a customer through a unified function.

We then have to proceed by writing a function that effectively allows 
programmers to access the values of a customer:
```python
def get_customer_attribute(id, attr_name):
    key = f'cust:{id}:{attr_name}'
    return app_namespace[key]
```
Then, we also need to write a function to set any values of a customer:
```python
def set_customer_attribute(id, attr_name, value):
    key = f'cust:{id}:{attr_name}'
    app_namespace[key] = value
```

The `get_customer_attribute` function retrieves any attribute value of a customer by composing a key based on the 
provided customer ID and attribute name. Similarly, the `set_customer_attribute` function sets a value for any attribute 
of a customer using the constructed key. AppNameSpace holds the keys and corresponding values.

## Handling Value Ranges
**Keys can be crafted to specify ranges**, enabling the retrieval of groups of values. E.g.: 
Retrieving customers who made purchases on a specific date. 
Dates can be embedded in keys, such as `cust061514` indicating customers who bought products on June 15, 2014. Customer 
IDs are the associated values within these keys, while keys are structured to indicate the sequence of customers who 
made purchases on the specified date.

Therefore, we can implement a function to retrieve a list of customer IDs who made purchases on a given date. Here’s a code example:
```python
def get_customer_ids_by_date(target_date):
    customer_ids = []
    range_count = 1
    key = f'cust:{target_date}:{range_count}:custID'

    while key in app_namespace:
        value = app_namespace[key]
        customer_ids.append(value)
        range_count += 1
        key = f'cust:{target_date}:{range_count}:custID'

    return customer_ids
```

The function `get_customers_ids_by_date` retrieves a list of customer IDs who made purchases on the specified date. It 
iterates through keys associated with the date and extracts the customer IDs, appending them to the result list.

While similar functions may standardize code, **they might not be more more efficient** than retrieving key-value pairs 
individually. Each pair could potentially be stored in a **distinct block**, resulting in similar performance to 
individual retrievals. Consequently, we can consider other retrieval options:
- **Ordered key values:** storing keys in contiguous blocks based on their order can improve retrieval efficiency.
- **Secondary indexes:** utilizing secondary indexes can provide alternative efficient methods for accessing ranges of values within the database.

## Designing structured values
When designing applications utilizing key-value data stores, we should also consider the **workload** and **frequency of data access**. For example, if a customer address retrieval is needed 80% of the time when retrieving a customer name, it's practical to retrieve both the name and the address together in one function call. A simple function implementation would be:
```python
def get_customer_name_address(customer_id):
    first_name = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'fname')
    last_name = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'lname')
    address = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'addr')
    city = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'city')
    state = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'state')
    zip_code = get_customer_attr(customer_id, 'zip')

    full_name = f'{first_name} {last_name}'
    full address = f'{address} {city}, {state} {zip_code}'

    return [full_name, full_address]
```
Fetching values from the datastore incurs latency, especially when reading from disk. Therefore, storing commonly used attribute values together can mitigate this latency. For example, storing customer name and address together in a list within a single key-value pair:
```python
customer_namespace['cust:198277:addr'] = ['Jane Anderson', '39 NE River St. Portland, OR 97222']
```
This structure reduces the number of disk seeks required to read all necessary data, resulting in faster data retrieval.

On the other hand, if customer names are often needed without the address, they can be stored separately. This can be done by duplicating the customer name in the key-value store, using distinct keys:
- Name-only key for looking up just the name.
- Name and address key when both are needed.
Storing structures as values offers advantages, such as reduced disk seeks. However, there are limits to these 
advantages, and careful consideration is needed when designing the data structure.

## An example
Consider the following data structure, representing a customer's order:
```json
{
  "custFname": "Liona",
  "custLname": "Williams",
  "custAddr": "987 Highland Rd",
  "custCity": "Springfield",
  "custState": "NJ",
  "custZip": 21111,
  "ordItems": [
    {
      "itemID": "85838A",
      "itemQty": 2,
      "descr": "Intel Core i7 processor",
      "price": 325.00
    },
    {
      "itemID": "38371R",
      "itemQty": 1,
      "descr": "Intel BOXDP67BGB3 Socket 1155, Intel P67...",
      "price": 140.00
    },
    {
      "itemID": "10484K",
      "itemQty": 1,
      "descr": "EVGA GeForce GT 740...",
      "price": 201.00
    }
  ]
}
```
As for the value structure, the values include both customer and order information. Customer information is stored as a 
set of string values with corresponding attribute names, while the order items are stored in an array, with each item 
specifying an identifier, quantity, product description, and price. This entire list can be stored under a single order 
key.

### Advantages
- Information about orders is accessible with a single key lookup.

### Disadvantages
- Values are treated as atomic units, requiring the entire value to be written, even if only a small part changes.
- When a new item is added, the entire list (including customer information) must be rewritten.
- Adding a new item may require using a new block, leading to increased storage overhead and potentially slower access times.

## Limitations
Basic key-value datastores restrict retrieval soley to key-based lookup, making it difficult to retrieve information 
without knowing the specific key associated with it. Some systems, like **Riak**, attempt to overcome this limitation by 
offering **text search capabilities**. For instance, Riak indexes data values upon their addition to the database and 
supports various search operations such as wildcard, proximity, and range searches. These search functions return a key 
that meet the specified criteria. 

A query example would be: *list all orders that includ the purchase of a computer case and motherboard, not a CPU*.
```riak
field : {'motherboard' AND 'computer case'} AND NOT 'CPU'
```

To address the constraint of lookup-by-key, some systems employ secondary indexes. This allows attributes within values 
to be indexed, enabling lookup operations based on these attributes. For example, an index on state or city within an 
address value facilitates lookup by state or city name.

Key-value databases typically lack support for range queries. However, some specialized mechanisms and databases provide 
alternatives, such as specialized naming conventions and lookup mechanisms, or the utilization of sorted structures, 
enabling range queries. Additionally, databases with secondary indexes and text search capabilities may offer support 
for range queries.