# Introducing Document Databases

## Document Databases: An Overview
In document databases, information is organized into documents, which essentially consists of ordered sets of key-value 
pairs. These documents are then grouped into what are known as collections, which serve as containers for related 
documents. Unlike traditional relational databases, where all records in a table share the same structure, documents 
within a collection in document databases do not necessarily adhere to a uniform schema, that's because of the 
semi-structured nature of the documents. Therefore, when designing a document database, one of the crucial decisions 
resolves around how to organize these documents into collections effectively.

## Designing Collections
Collections in document databases are akin to tables in relational databases, but with greater flexibility in terms of 
schema enforcement. They are essentially sets of documents, providig a level of logical organization for the stored 
data. Unlike relational databases, collections do not impose a consistent structure on the documents they contain. This 
means that a single collection can accomodate various types of documents, each representing different entities or data 
sourcs. However, it's generally considered the best practice to group documents within a collection that pertain ti tge 
sane type of entity. For example, customer data, web clickstream data, and server log dat could each reside in their 
respective collections.

## Avoid Overly Abstract Entity Types
When designing document schemas, it's essential to avoid overly abstract entity types, as they can lead to challenges in 
practical modeling. For instance, consider a scenario where documents representing web clickstream data and server log 
data are stored together in a collection labeled as **system events**.
```python
{
    "id": 12334578,
    "datetime": "201409182210",
    "session_num": 987943,
    "client_IP_addr": "192.168.10.10",
    "user_agent": "Mozilla / 5.0",
    "referring_page": "http://www.example.com/page1"
}


{
    "id": 31244578,
    "datetime": "201409172140",
    "event_type": "add_user",
    "server_IP_addr": "192.168.11.11",
    "descr": "User jones added with sudo privileges"
}
```
While these documents may share some common fields, they likely have distinct attributes and purposes. In such cases, 
relying soley on a generic "system event" entity type can make it difficult to efficiently query and manage the data.

A naive technique could be adding a type indicator to distinguish web clickstream documents from server log event ones.

```python
{
    "id": 12334578,
    "datetime": "201409182210",
    "doc_type": "click_stream",
    "session_num": 987943,
    "client_IP_addr": "192.168.10.10",
    "user_agent": "Mozilla / 5.0",
    "referring_page": "http://www.example.com/page1"
}


{
    "id": 31244578,
    "datetime": "201409172140",
    "doc_type": "server_log",
    "event_type": "add_user",
    "server_IP_addr": "192.168.11.11",
    "descr": "User jones added with sudo privileges"
}
```
This technique is not optimal, as mixing diverse document types within the same collection can introduce performance 
challenges, particularly when filtering or querying data. For example, if a collection contains a mix of clickstream and 
server log documents, say 650,000 of the first type and 350,000 of the second type, filtering based on document types 
can become very complex and potentially slower. That's because the blocks of retrieved data contain both document types, 
so the application needs to filter them. 

Although indexing can improve query performance, it may not fully address the issue, as indexed data blocks may still 
contain a mix of document types. A full scan of the collection may be more efficient, but the performance would be 
affected by the collection size, the index, and the number of distinct document types. Moreover, an overhead is 
introduced by index writing, as new documents are added to the collection

## Design Considerations
Identifying the need for multiple collections often stems from the application logic itself. If significan portions of 
the application code are dedicated to handling specific types of documents or entities, it may be a sign that those 
documents should be stored in separate collections. Similarly, if conditional statements proliferate to accomodate 
different types of document types, it may indicate that distinct collections would be more appropriate for managing the data effectively.